so before we get started I just want to
say a massive thank you to everyone
who's pre-ordered my new book so far
it's coming out the fifth of September
it's called space the ten things you
should know and everybody who
pre-ordered it has already managed to
get it bumped up to the top of Amazon's
bestseller list at some point last week
which was absolutely incredible just
answer a couple of questions that I've
seen that people have had in the
comments yes I am gonna be narrating the
audiobook myself and I'm very excited
for the day that I'm gonna go record
that and I'll update you on YouTube
stories when I do
second of all like the hardcover
physical version of the book will
eventually be available to pre-order
like in the US and Australia and outside
of the UK the publishers are just sort
of working behind the scenes to get all
that sorted in terms of like working
with US publishers Australian publishers
etc so as soon as those links become
available I will put them in the
description below up so that you can go
and pre-order of those as well until
then you can always order the e-book if
you want as well so without further ado
let's get into this night sky news for
May 20 19
[Music]
as always with night sky news let's
start by looking up to the sky and
thinking about what we can see for the
next one
[Music]
okay so this one's for the notification
squad because this is gonna be something
that you can see tonight like Wednesday
night Thursday morning the 22nd and 23rd
of May there is a conduction of Saturn
with the moon she's healing really early
in the morning on Thursday the 23rd
right before dawn you're gonna be able
to see Saturn right next to the full
moon it's gonna be about 30 arc minutes
away from the full moon which is about
the distance of the full moon in the sky
again if you have binoculars somewhere
in your house dig them out from wherever
they are buried you should be able to
see the sort of telltale golden color of
Saturn and maybe even spot one of
Saturn's moons as well unfortunately the
Rings are a little pain to see in
binoculars but if you had a telescope
why not crack that out this morning as
well then as we get into early June on
the 5th of June in the evenings this is
one sort of for your night hours rather
than your early warning people we're
gonna have Mars getting very close to
the moon as well this time the moon is
gonna be a really thin Crescent and Mars
give me a little bit further a so I'll
be sort of three thumb widths away from
the moon again really nice thing to spot
in the sky the bright red planet next to
a crescent moon again this isn't one for
us in the UK here this is gonna happen
in the constellation of Gemini which is
one of the ones on the ecliptic that the
Sun passes through it's May June the Sun
is gonna be in Taurus very close to
Gemini so it's gonna happen right after
sunset quite low on the horizon so the
closer you are to the equator for this
one actually the better also in the UK
you know we're getting into sort of the
longest days here and actually getting
very close to the summer solstice and
our latitudes even you know sort of the
entirety of the UK for about 20 days or
so in the summer we never actually get
into what's classified astronomically as
nighttime
well only ever in astronomical Twilight
so you have civil twilight nautical
Twilight then your astronomical Twilight
and then full-on nighttime
which basically means you can then do
professional astronomy observing because
the sky is still not sort of half lit by
the Sun anymore and it's diviners when
the Sun drops 18 degrees below the
horizon
so that never actually happens in the
summertime for us in the UK so the glow
of the sky is gonna be quite bright for
us in the next couple of weeks but on
the 10th of June
Jupiter is actually going into what we
call opposition it means it's directly
opposite the Sun in the sky it's a bits
closest point to Earth in its orbit and
it's a great time to catch it in the sky
because it's generally extremely bright
and also visible throughout the entire
night as well so it's gonna be in the
constellation of off mucus which is this
13th constellation on the ecliptic or
the zodiac but I was talking about in
last week's video debunking horoscopes
which was weird for me but still fun
again break out some binoculars see if
you can see any of those Galilean moons
IO Ganymede Europa Callisto it depends
where they are in that orbits if you can
see all four of them some of them might
be tucked away behind Jupiter but also
look out for the stripes on Jupiter as
well there are those storm clouds of gas
wearing around through Jupiter there's
also going to be a meteor shower from
the same constellation late this month
the offer you kids meets your shower
again so the further you are from the
equator the more you're gonna struggle
to see any and even on the equator
there's only really predicted to be
about 5 an hour or so so if you do hear
it hyped in the media just be wary of
that you know in the North up here we're
probably only gonna be able to see one
an hour something like that so maybe
keep your eyes peeled if you are sort of
out somewhere where you've got a great
view of the night sky if you do see a
meteor it could be from that shower but
otherwise I wouldn't necessarily go out
specifically hoping to see Sun because
you might be there waiting quite a while
so next up for night sky news is
reflecting on all of the space views
that's happened in the past month
[Music]
class reminds back a couple weeks and
you remember that Israel tried to send a
probe to the moon it was gonna be the
first privately funded moon mission and
it was all started because of Google's
Lunar XPrize that promise like a cash
flumps sum to the first team to make it
to the moon
unfortunately they crashed in their
attempt don't the communications drops
out to the probe and the engine a to be
restarted and they couldn't fire the
thrusters to slow the craft down as it
descended to the surface unfortunately
it ended up hitting the moon at quite a
large speed back on April 11th so they
had to announce that unfortunately they
had lost contact with the probe so then
last as the lunar reconnaissance orbiter
ended up searching the expected impact
site to see if they could see any
difference in the imaging from before
and after the crash so the impact site
was thought to be the sea of serenity
which is if you look at the moon and you
can see the man in the moon it's the man
in the moon's left eye or right as we
look at it so the LRO did manage to find
the impact site and you can really
clearly see that sort of white impact
halo around the darker impact site and
even that sort of tail that followers it
that actually is very consistent with
the angle and trajectory that we think
that the craft came in on from its last
communication as well this was spotted
on April 22nd by the LRO as it went
about 90 kilometers above the surface
and the one thing to note is that there
isn't actually a visible crater in the
image now that could be for one of two
reasons it could be that the LRO was
just orbiting too high up to be able to
spot the crater at that distance or it
could just be that because the lander
was pretty small you know maybe see a
meteor cross or so it didn't really
leave a full-on crater but just more of
like a dent in the surface now if you
cash your mines that you remember that
we lost opportunity at the end of last
year to a giant planet-wide dust storm
on Mars and so there's paper by van de
LaSalle that came out at the end of
April was saying perhaps the two things
are linked perhaps these global dust
storms are actually also responsible for
the reason that Mars no longer has
that much water so we know there is
water on Mars a lot of it is in ice
that's trapped at the polar ice caps but
there's also some water vapour in the
atmosphere of Mars that we've detected
too but then we've also detected by
studying the geology of Mars signatures
that water once did flow there the same
that we see on earth where you have sort
of water carving out riverbeds and
through rocks we have the same evidence
for water flow on Mars but the question
is you know where did that water go so
this paper suggests that the global dust
storms might actually be responsible for
this so storms start in the same way
that storms do on earth the Sun heats
the air just above the surface that hot
air rises and takes with it a lot of the
dust from the planet's surface but also
could be taking water vapour from down
near the lower altitudes up to the
higher altitudes as well and this paper
detected that before the storm there was
your typical concentration of water
vapor sort of below 40 kilometers in
altitude and then during the storm that
then peaked at much higher altitudes or
between 40 and 80 kilometers high up in
the atmosphere though you're much more
exposed to sunlight and sunlight can
cause water to you what's called
dissociate so stop being h2o and just go
back to being oxygen and hydrogen atoms
instead if that happens you've then just
got very light molecules high up in the
atmosphere that can be very easily lost
to space and so because of the detection
is that on daylight I'll make they make
this hypothesis that global wide does
storms that happen every three years or
so can cause water to be lost from near
the surface to high into the atmosphere
and then eventually into space and this
could explain why water may have once
flowed on Mars but no longer does so the
next thing you want to talk about is the
planetary defense conference that
happened in Washington DC in the first
week of May what they did was get
together experts in astronomy
astrophysics space exploration people
who are experts in dealing with
emergency situations politicians
everybody to discuss what we would
actually do in the case of an asteroid
threat so what NASA's JPL did was come
up with this hypothetical scenario where
they knew sort of this exact orbit of
this hypothetical asteroid and they knew
what
is gonna be and they knew how it was
gonna play out from now over the next
decade and what they did was say okay
we've spotted it in the sky without
current telescopes and our best guess
for what's gonna happen to this asteroid
is there's a 1% chance of it hitting the
earth in 2027 and this was sort of their
day one this is what they were told and
it was sort of over the week it was as
the scenario played out everyone that
had to change you know what was the best
thing to do as this scenario played out
and I would love to have been a fly on
the wall during that whole conference
because I bet would have been
fascinating fascinating but also like a
little bit of relief that at least
people are thinking about this ahead of
time so that we can be prepared for
something like this as well I think you
imagined it playing out like a scene
from under snatching of the Black Mirror
film where the participants of the
conference are there like evacuate NYC
nuke the asteroid like it some of you
might have seen us on Twitter because
Issa make a very brave decision to
actually live tweet this conference with
just a hash tag saying like exercise or
like fictional event and all of the
documents that they gave out there were
like press releases just how to exercise
in massive red letters on them as well
so that people wouldn't freak out and
think that it was a real event but
obviously it was Twitter so people did
freak out when they saw those tweets and
eventually realize that no it wasn't a
real threat to the earth so I feel like
I should probably do the same thing
because I feel like if people fall
asleep maybe and then this video
shuffles on and they wake up and hear me
talking about an asteroid this could
impact with the earth they might freak
out so we do the same thing we should
have exercised in massive red flashing
letters the entire time I talk about
this okay I don't like that that just
makes me feel really guilty for not
going to the gym lately let's do
something else
fictional event okay I can deal with
that that is nice enough so on day one
of the conference they were told this
asteroid had been spotted and from the
observations we currently have which are
not that great because we have always
seen it a couple of times
know that it might have 1% chance of
hitting the earth in about eight years
or so what do you do and I see everyone
then discussed what the best course of
action would be so that on day two who
then had a press release to say okay
this is what we decided but then also
NASA JPL updated them to say right okay
day two it's now July 2019 and they said
the observations over the past four
months as the asteroid has got slightly
closer to earth and we could see it
because it brightened more we've been
able to refine our estimates and
actually find there's a one in ten
chance of it hitting the earth in 2027
they're still uncertain on the size
because they've not seen it in radar yet
it's not being close enough to do that
but it's probably about 140 to 260
meters wide and therefore an impact
would release maybe about one hundred to
eight hundred megatons and cause serious
damage on the earth at least it would be
localized damage it wouldn't be like a
global sort of catastrophe or LA like
dust would block out the Sun and
everything it's very localized but still
a threat so by day three which is
supposed to be December 2019 you find
out that the delegates back in July
decided that they should send a
reconnaissance mission to the space
graph to determine its mass its size its
density in its orbit much much better so
they had much better science to go off
so that by day three JPL are telling
them okay because you've done that
you've found out that actually impact is
certain and it's gonna hit Denver
Colorado in April 2027 so it's like what
do you do now delegates okay well they
decide to send two more reconnaissance
missions to constantly track this
asteroids progress at all times that we
constantly have information about it in
the meantime let's get NASA ether
Jackson China Space Agency Russia Space
Agency to all work together to build
what will essentially be like a
deflecting mission and essentially what
they decided to do is send up six
spacecraft that would just impact with
the asteroid and then that exchange of
momentum would slowly change the
asteroids trajectory ever so slightly
and push it away from Earth now that's
great but obviously that assumes that
all those space agencies are willing to
work together and also to pay to do that
when
since it is actually just gonna hit the
US is gonna hit Denver so that all
brightens the politicians into play as
well especially because the delegates
also say well those reconnaissance
missions we better just put maybe a nuke
on one of those in case this redirection
plan goes wrong and we can then just
maybe blow up blast roid as like a last
result so the politicians really do step
in here because if you start launching a
nuke on a rocket in a spacecraft are you
violating a little like international
treaties etc so that's why they're there
to sort of try and hash that out as well
so then by day four which is supposed to
be September 2020 for NASA and JPL tell
them okay the deflector mission mostly
worked however when one of the
spacecraft deflectors impacted with the
asteroid quite a large chunk broke off
so now the main asteroid is not going to
hit anymore but that chunk still is and
your reconnaissance missions that were
out there monitoring the asteroid core
all that and call all the images and so
we can see that how wide it is and you
can see that it's still about 100 metres
wide again very localized threat to
somewhere on earth and again they're not
entirely sure on this new chunk of
asteroids trajectory but basically it's
gonna hit somewhere either from the
Atlantic Ocean all across the eastern
and central u.s. they're all at risk I'm
wondering whether the people at NASA JPL
watch Deep Impact before they came up
with this scenario because it's starting
to sound very similar to me so you might
think well we've still got that
rendezvous craft with the possible nuke
on it right we could still nuke that
little chunk of asteroid that broke off
but unfortunately all that international
discussion and politics broke down that
didn't work and nuke a never went on
that reconnaissance craft so now there's
emergency nuke plans being discussed by
the delegates all day saying well can we
now debate whether we can send one up
anyway because if it hits the atlantic
ocean that's gonna be a tidal wave
scenario and that's gonna impact a lot
more people than if it's a localized
impact on the US and so those
discussions then take place as well
whilst also having contingency plans for
evacuation of like most of the eastern
seaboard that's at risk so that by day
five it's supposed to be like 10 days
before the actual impact
and JPL have been like right we now know
that the actual impact site will be
Central Park in New York which I think
they knew that from the beginning
because that seems a little bit Costa
Dental to me but they now know that it's
gonna hit the atmosphere where the 19
kilometers per second speed is about
43,000 miles an hour's incredibly fast
and when it hits New York City even
though the asteroid itself is only about
80 meters across the devastation will be
incredible for miles and miles around
and they have released all this sort of
warning information about the time that
the devastation is going to take to get
from sort of the Ground Zero all the way
out to New Jersey and also the sort of
devastation that will follow as well so
on the delegates are now sort of
discussing okay we need mass evacuation
of most of New York New Jersey and the
surrounding area and how do we go about
doing that you're also going to put like
a blanket flight restriction in the
impact zone as well because you don't
anything being taken down out of the sky
and so obviously the focus is now on
evacuation which might sound pretty dire
but at least throughout this whole
conference they've been able to discuss
you know possibility of sending a nuke
up they've been able to sort of
implement the deflection method as well
as the asteroid and now obviously the
people who focus on evacuation in these
kind of events are also practicing what
would happen if in the worst case
scenario we weren't able to do anything
before the impacts so this might sound
pretty far-fetched but in fact in April
20 2019 there's a near-earth asteroid
that's gonna pass incredibly close to
the yes we know it's not going to impact
but we know that it's going to be very
very close pass it's actually gonna be
within where our weather satellites
orbit so incredibly incredibly bright in
the sky it's actually invisible to the
naked eye when that happens in 2029 as
well like during the day it's about 340
meters in diameter and so it would have
a global sort of effect if it did impact
with the earth but thankfully it's not
going to it's got a less than one in
10,000 chance and then actually
happening so in caster's potentially
hazardous but we know that at the minute
from our observations that have been
repeat observationally won't happen so
they take away from this other
and amateur astronomers are constantly
monitoring the sky but anything that
moves that we haven't spotted before and
constantly keeping a record of all of
the near-earth asteroids and we are on
top of it and that there are people that
are actually playing out what would
happen around the world if something
like that like this did happen so that
we can be prepared you know we might
have you know at eight years warning
like this dead we might have decades
warning perhaps if we do keep monitoring
the sky which thankfully there is money
being put into programs that do do that
the other thing to take away from this
is that although that deflection method
of impacting spacecraft into the
asteroid to deflect it might sound a
little bit like it was fiction that is
actually being put into effect by NASA
and ISA in the coming months so nASA has
a mission called dart and ISA has a
mission called Hera both of which in the
next two or three years are expected to
launch and impact with an asteroid that
is not a threat to earth it's not a
near-earth asteroid but impact the
asteroid in order to determine if it did
change the asteroids orbit or trajectory
and to test out whether this would be a
feasible way of getting rid of such an
asteroid threat to Earth I hope you
enjoyed this monster night sky news
remember all the links for everything
I've talked about papers and press
releases are all in the description
below I would highly recommend going and
reading all the planetary defense
conference stuff because it is great the
link for pre-ordering my book is also in
the description below so thank you again
to all of you who did that I will see
you in next week's video until then
happy stargazing so this is the sea of
serenity or mer staring at us I can't
say that in French don't even don't even
attempt to say Maris Erin's house
because you're just getting it all wrong
Apophis Apophis there was Altima thule
news this week and you know what I just
decided that I was just like I'm not
going to include it because I can't
pronounce it and now we've got APIs
remember was water first texted on Mars
you know maybe I didn't even live
through it so how do I know when water
was detected on Mars on the top my head
where is my phone
you